# WS12: Static and Dynamic Libraries (optional)
Static and dynamic linking collect and combine multiple object files in a single executable.  
Linking, performed by programs called linkers, can be performed at:
* **compile time**: the source code is translated into machine code (last step in compilation)
* **load/run time**: when the program is loaded into memory and executed by the loader

## Linking
Instead of a large application in a single source file, it is better to have smaller, more manageable, sources which may be compiled separately.

Static linking:
* All library routines used are copied in the executable.
* More space used on the disk and in memory.
* Faster and more portable (no dependencies).

Dynamic linking:
* Shareable library name is placed in the executable image and actual linking takes place at run time
* Sharing a single shareable library among multiple programs.
* Executables are smaller.

Missing function definitions:
* During compilation: compiler assumes that the function is defined in another file, and treats it as an external reference. The compiler does not look at more than one file at a time.
* During linking: linker may look at multiple files and seeks references for the modules that were not mentioned, complaining when they are not found.

## Static linking
The linker combines library routines with the program code to resolve external references, and to generate an executable image suitable for loading into memory. In the example we will be using the following files: 
* ```add.c``` - Add module code 
* ```add.h``` - Prototype of add module 
* ```addDemo.c``` - Used to demonstrate the linking process

**Step1**: Create a header file ```add.h``` with the ```add()``` function signature:
```c
int add(int, int);
```
**Step2**: Create a source file ```addDemo.c``` with the following code: 
```c
#include <add.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
int main(void) { 
  int x= 10, y = 20;
  printf("\n%d + %d = %d", x, y, add(x, y));
  return 0;
}
```
**Step3**: Create a file named add.c with the code of add module: 
```c
int add(int quant1, int quant2) {
  return(quant1 + quant2);
}
```
**Step4**: Build the executable as follows: 
```$ gcc -I . -c addDemo.c 
$ ls 
add.c add.h addDemo.c addDemo.o 
```
The -I option tells GCC to search for header files in the directory which is specified after it. Here, GCC is asked to look for header files in the current directory along with the include directory.  
*Note: In Unix/Linux systems the . is interpreted as current directory.*

**Step5**: compile ```add.c``` 
```
$ gcc -c add.c 
$ ls 
add.c add.h add.o addDemo.c addDemo.o 
```
**Step6**: Generate the executable by linking ```add.o```, and ```addDemo.o``` to generate executable object file: 
```
$ gcc -o addDemo add.o addDemo.o 
$ ls 
add.c add.h add.o addDemo.c addDemo addDemo.o 
```
*Note: the linker could also be directly be invoked using the ld command*

## Static libraries
Static libraries usually they have .a extension. ```addDemo``` will be extended to use of static libraries. 

**Step1**: Create a new header file ```heymath.h``` with signatures of two functions add and sub: 
```c
int add(int, int); //adds two integers 
int sub(int, int); //subtracts second integer from first 
```

**Step2**: Create a file ```sub.c```: 
```c
int sub(int quant1, int quant2) { 
  return (quant1 -quant2);
}
```

**Step3**: Compile sub.c to get the binary object file 
```
$ gcc -c sub.c $ ls ... sub.c sub.o
```

**Step4**: Create a static library called libheymath by collecting ```sub.o``` and ```add.o``` together. 
```
$ ar rs libheymath.a add.o sub.o 
$ ls .
.. libheymath.a sub.c sub.o 
```

**Step5**: Create a program that uses ```libheymath.a``` by creating a new file ```addDemo2.c```
```c
#include <heymath.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
int main(void) {
  int x = 10, y = 20; 
  printf("\n%d + %d = %d", x, y, add(x, y));
  printf("\n%d -%d = %d", x, y, sub(x, y)); 
  return 0; 
}
```

**Step6**: Compile the program 
```
$ gcc -I . -c addDemo2.c
```

**Step7**: Link it with heymath.a to generate final executable object file.
```
$ gcc -o addDemo2 addDemo2.o libheymath.a 
```
Alternatively, you can use: 
```
$ gcc -o addDemo2 -L . addDemo2.o –lheymath
```
In above command ```-lheymath``` should be read as ```-l heymath``` which tells the linker to link the object files contained in ```lib<library>.a``` with ```addDemo2``` to generate the executable object file. In our example this is ```libheymath.a```. The ```-L``` option tells the linker to search for libraries in the following argument (like how we did for ```-I```).

## Dynamic Linking
Dynamic linking happens when a program starts running. The main advantages are the reduced size of the executable and libraries can be updated without updating the whole executable.

### Creating a shared library
A shared library (on Linux) or a dynamic link library (DLL on Windows) is a collection of object files. We will have to recompile both ```add.c``` and ```sub.c``` again with ```-fPIC``` option which enables "position independent code" generation, a requirement for shared libraries.  

**Step1**: Recompile both ```add.c```, and ```sub.c```: 
```
$ gcc -Wall -fPIC -c add.c 
$ gcc -Wall -fPIC -c sub.c 
```
**Step2**: Build the library ```libheymath.so```: 
```
$ gcc -shared -o libheymath.so add.o sub.o 
$ ls .
.. add.c add.o sub.c sub.o libheymath.so 
```
Once you create a shared library you will have to install it and the simplest approach is to copy the library into one of the standard directories (e.g., /usr/lib) and run ```ldconfig``` command.

Now you can recompile ```addDemo2``` using the shared library as follows:
```
$ gcc –I . -c addDemo2.c 
$ gcc -o addDemo2 addDemo2.o libheymath.so 
```

Reference: https://cs-fundamentals.com/c-programming/static-and-dynamic-linking-in-c.php
