# WS13: Threads Sharing a File
Create a structure that contains the following fields:
* Thread name
* Thread delay in seconds
* Maximum number of prints

Put this structure in a header file, ```threads.h```.

Write a program (```main.c```) that takes an output file as a command line argument. The program should repeatedly ask the user to enter a thread name, delay in seconds and maximum number of prints. For each set create an instance of the structure on the heap and fill it up. Pass the structure to a new thread. This process stops when the user inputs ‘stop’ as the name of the thread (even if not all the threads are ready).

Each thread should write its name for the maximum number of times in the output file, pausing for the delay between each writeusing ```sleep()```. Make sure you close the file before sleeping for the delay so that you avoid locking the file. Once the maximum number of wires had been performed, the thread should die naturally. The thread function should be in C file of its own (```thread.c```).

Sample output:
```
$ ./threads out.log
Enter the name of the thread: Five
Enter the delay in seconds: 5
Enter the maximum number of writes: 5
Enter the name of the thread: Six
Enter the delay in seconds: 6
Enter the maximum number of writes: 6
Enter the name of the thread: stop

$ cat out.log
thread: Five
thread: Five
thread: Six
thread: Five
thread: Six
thread: Five
thread: Six
thread: Five
thread: Six
thread: Six
thread: Six
```

## Program improvements
Implement the following improvements:
* Update the program to use a file as input(e.g. [input.txt](./input.txt)), instead of the user inputting the thread properties manually. Wait until the user presses a key before exiting.
* Use a mutex to make sure that the output file is only opened by one thread.
