# WS02: 4 stages of building code

A C program goes through 4 stages to become an executable:

| Stage | Input | Output |
|----------|-------------|------|
| 1. Pre-processing | file.c | file.i |
| 2. Compilation | file.i | file.s |
| 3. Assembly | file.s | file.o |
| 4. Linking | file.o | file |
    
This worksheet is based on the following code. Create a file (file.c) and copy this code in it:
```c
#include <stdio.h> #define MESSAGE "Most people's C programs should be indented six feet downward and covered with dirt."
int main(void) { 
  /* Blair P. Houghton said the following */ 
  printf(MESSAGE); 
  return 0; 
}
```

In Linux calling man on any program will show the manual for that particular program.

```man gcc > gcc_manual.txt``` will create a file (gcc_manual.txt) with all the information needed to use gcc. Keep this file handy.

## 1.Pre-processing
Run the following command: ```gcc -Wall -save-temps file.c -o ws1```

*-save-temps* Store the usual "temporary" intermediate files permanently; place them in the current directory and name them based on the source file. Thus, compiling foo.c with -c -save-temps produces files foo.i and foo.s, as well as foo.o.
The pre-processed output is stored in worksheet1.i. Open it and check the number of lines in the file (should be more than 800 lines). Most of the file content are added by gcc but at the end you should see our lines of code. The following should be noted:

1. *Macro expansion*: the argument to printf() now contains the full string and not the macro. Also the macro definition is no longer in the code.
2. *Comment removal*: The comment in the original code is no longer there.
3. *Header inclusion*: The line starting with ```#include``` is replaced by hundreds of lines of code as a result of the inclusion of stdio.h. This is how the compiler is able to generate the instructions for printf() function.

Search for printf in worksheet1.i and you should find this line:  
```extern int printf (const char *__restrict __format, ...);```
