# WS02: 4 stages of building code

A C program goes through 4 stages to become an executable:

| | Stage | Input | Output |
|-|----------|-------------|------|
|1| Pre-processing | file.c | file.i |
|2| Compilation | file.i | file.s |
|3| Assembly | file.s | file.o |
|4| Linking | file.o | file |

> Note: All files used in this worksheet can be found at [worksheets/worksheet02](https://github.com/robert-abela/llp2/tree/master/worksheets/worksheet02)
    
This worksheet is based on the following code. Create a file (file.c) and copy this code in it:
```c
#include <stdio.h> 
#define MESSAGE "Most people's C programs should be indented six feet downward and covered with dirt."
int main(void) { 
  /* Blair P. Houghton said the following */ 
  printf(MESSAGE); 
  return 0; 
}
```

In Linux calling man on any program will show the manual for that particular program.

```man gcc > gcc_manual.txt``` will create a file (gcc_manual.txt) with all the information needed to use gcc. Keep this file handy.

## 1.Pre-processing
Run the following command: ```gcc -Wall -save-temps file.c -o file```

*-save-temps Stores the usual "temporary" intermediate files permanently; place them in the current directory and name them based on the source file. Thus, compiling foo.c with -c -save-temps produces files foo.i and foo.s, as well as foo.o.*

The pre-processed output is stored in ```file.i```. Open it and check the number of lines in the file (should be more than 800 lines). Most of the file content are added by gcc but at the end you should see our lines of code. The following should be noted:

1. **Macro expansion**: the argument to printf() now contains the full string and not the macro. Also the macro definition is no longer in the code.
2. **Comment removal**: The comment in the original code is no longer there.
3. **Header inclusion**: The line starting with ```#include``` is replaced by hundreds of lines of code as a result of the inclusion of stdio.h. This is how the compiler is able to generate the instructions for printf() function.

Search for printf in ```file.i``` and you should find this line:  
```c
extern int printf (const char *__restrict __format, ...);
```

## 2. Compilation
The next step takes ```file.i``` as input, compiles it and produces an intermediate compiled output. The output for this stage is the file ```file.s``` which contains assembly level instructions. Open the file and have a look at the current shape of our program. You do not need to understand the assembly instructions.

## 3. Assembly
At this stage ```file.s``` is the input and ```file.o``` (the object file) is produced. This is done by the assembler which converts a file with assembly instructions into an object file which contains machine level instructions. You will notice that this file is a lot shorter since only the existing code is converted into machine language. 

```file.o``` is meant to be read by computers (not by humans). However you can still peek at its contents by using: 
```cat file.o```

While the output is not all readable you will still be able to recognise some strings. One important section you should be aware of is ELF (executable and linkable format) at the beginning of the file. This is the format of the object file which is made up of different sections.

## 4. Linking
Linking is the final stage where all function calls are linked to their definitions. Up to this stage gcc kept a placeholder for functions that we did not implement, like printf(). The linker finds this implementation and plugs it in. The compiler also adds some code that is required by our program such as code to access command line arguments and environment variables and the code required to return the return value of the program to the system.

The newly added code is not readable by humans but we can confirm that this was added and check its size by using, wait for it, size.

Comparing the sizes of ```file.o``` and the executable ```file``` you will see differences as shown below:
```
$ size file.o
text    data    bss     dec     hex     filename
199        0      0     199      c7     file.o
$ size file
text    data    bss     dec     hex     filename
1195     276      4    1475     5c3     file
```

References:
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format
* http://www.thegeekstuff.com/2011/10/c-program-to-an-executable/
* http://www.cprogramming.com/compilingandlinking.html
* https://codingfreak.blogspot.com.mt/2008/02/compilation-process-in-gcc.html
* http://academic.udayton.edu/saverioperugini/courses/cps346/lecture_notes/compiling.html
